*
THE BLUE PLANET.
THE EARTH IS MADE OF A
LOT OF DIFFERENT THINGS.
THERE'S IRON, SOME
NICKEL, AND THERE'S
ALL SORTS OF
OTHER ELEMENTS.
THERE'S CANYONS
AND VOLCANOES.
A REALLY DYNAMIC PLACE
THAT WAS VERY DIFFERENT IN
THE PAST AND WILL BE VERY
DIFFERENT IN THE FUTURE.
THE EARTH HAS A HISTORY.
THE EXPANSIVE EARTH,
EXPLOSIVE VOLCANOES,
EXTRAORDINARY WEATHER,
MAJESTIC MOUNTAINS,
RUSHING RIVERS, AND MANY,
MANY DIFFERENT LANDSCAPES
WE CALL HOME.
TO BETTER UNDERSTAND OUR
PLANET WE LOOK TO GEOLOGY.
GEOLOGY IS THE STUDY OF
THE EARTH, OF EVERYTHING
THAT'S UNDERNEATH US,
THE ROCKS AND THE RIVERS
AND THE DIRT AND SOIL
AND VOLCANOES AND ALL OF
THE PROCESSES THAT MAKE
THE EARTH WHAT IT IS.
TO THINK OF THE EARTH
IN A SIMPLISTIC WAY,
AS BEING THE THIRD
PLANET FROM THE SUN
OUT OF NINE OR
PERHAPS TEN PLANETS...
WE LIVE ON IT AND LIFE
IS PERHAPS THE MOST
IMPORTANT THING ON IT,
BUT WE HAVE A TENDENCY
TO STUDY, AS GEOLOGISTS,
THE PHYSICAL STRUCTURE
OF THE EARTH AND
ITS ANCIENT HISTORY.
EVERYTHING YOU LOOK AT
TELLS AN AMAZING AND
FANTASTIC STORY ABOUT THE
EARTH AND THERE'S SO MANY
DIFFERENT STORIES THAT
THE EARTH REVEALS.
OUR EARTH HAS A VERY LONG
AND VERY DYNAMIC HISTORY
STARTING WITH A BANG AND
THE FORMATION OF THE EARTH
AND OUR SOLAR SYSTEM.
WE THINK THAT VERY EARLY
IN THE HISTORY OF OUR
SOLAR SYSTEM THERE WAS
A LARGE CIRCULATING MASS
OF GASES AND DUSTS AND
THAT THE DUST PARTICLES
STARTED TO COLLIDE AND
COALESCE WITH ONE ANOTHER
AND THAT OUR EARLY
PLANET FORMED IN RESPONSE
TO COLLISIONS OF ALL
OF THOSE DUST PARTICLES
HELD TOGETHER BY A
GRAVITATIONAL ATTRACTION.
THIS HYPOTHESIS OF HOW THE
EARTH FORMED IS CALLED
THE "SOLAR NEBULAR
HYPOTHESIS".
A NEBULA IS A CLOUD
OF INTERSTELLAR GAS,
AND THE THEORY IS THE
BASIC IDEA THAT THE SUN
AND THE PLANETS FORMED IN
THE SAME NEBULAR MATERIAL.
IF THE NEBULAR
MATERIAL'S DENSE ENOUGH,
IF THERE'S ENOUGH DUST
AND GAS, IT'LL BEGIN TO
KIND OF COLLAPSE IN ON ITSELF
AND BEGIN TO SWIRL ABOUT.
AS IT COLLAPSES IT
GENERATES AN ENORMOUS
AMOUNT OF HEAT, EVENTUALLY
CAUSING NUCLEAR FUSION
WHICH WILL PRODUCE
SOMETHING CALLED
AN EMBRYONIC SUN
IN THE MIDDLE.
ONCE YOU FORM THAT SUN,
I'D SAY ABOUT 99% OR SO
OF ALL THE MASS IN
THAT NEBULAR CLOUD
IS CONTAINED IN THE SUN.
WHAT LITTLE ITSY
BITSY PARTICLES
WERE SWIMMING
AROUND OUT THERE
THAT WERE LEFT OVER
AFTER THE SUN WAS MADE
GLOMMED ON TOGETHER
TO FORM THE PLANETS.
AND THEN, OF COURSE,
THERE WERE OTHER
PLANETARY MASSES
FLOATING AROUND.
THINGS COMING IN TO HIT
THE EARTH, BOUNCING OFF
TO FORM THE MOON, BOUNCING
OFF TO FORM THESE OTHER
LITTLE BITS OF ASTEROIDS AND
COMETS AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
THE EARTH AND THE SOLAR
SYSTEM ARE COMPOSED OF
MANY CHEMICAL ELEMENTS.
SOME ARE VERY HEAVY OR
DENSE LIKE IRON AND NICKEL,
AND OTHERS ARE LIGHT
LIKE HYDROGEN AND HELIUM.
WE DO SEE THE SAME
CHEMICAL ELEMENTS
DISTRIBUTED THROUGHOUT
OUR SOLAR SYSTEM
BUT THEY'RE DISTRIBUTED
IN SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT WAYS
SO THAT THE PLANETS THAT, AS
YOU GET FURTHER AND FURTHER
OUT IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM,
YOU SEE A GREATER ABUNDANCE
OF THE VERY LIGHT
GASEOUS ELEMENTS AND,
AS YOU GET CLOSER TO THE
SUN THERE ARE MORE OF THE
HEAVY ELEMENTS THAT FELL
IN THROUGH GRAVITATIONAL
ATTRACTION TOWARDS THE
CENTER OF OUR SOLAR SYSTEM.
OUR EARTH IS
LARGELY COMPOSED OF:
THERE'S AN IDEA, A THEORY,
A HYPOTHESIS THAT EARLY
IN EARTH'S FORMATION THAT
IT WAS A HOMOGENEOUS BALL,
THAT BASICALLY
ALL THE MATERIAL
THAT MAKES UP THE EARTH
WAS EVENLY DISTRIBUTED
THROUGHOUT THAT BALL.
AT SOME POINT THE EARTH
WAS HEATED AND WE THINK
THAT THROUGH THE PROCESS
OF METEORIC IMPACT,
RADIOACTIVE DECAY,
AND WHAT'S CALLED
GRAVITATIONAL COMPRESSION,
THE EARTH HEATED
SUFFICIENTLY TO ALLOW
ALL THIS MATERIAL
TO SEPARATE OUT AND
DIFFERENTIATE BY DENSITY.
MEANING THAT THE HEAVY
STUFF SUNK TO THE MIDDLE
AND THE LIGHT STUFF
FLOATED OUT TO THE SURFACE.
FUNDAMENTALLY IT'S A VERY
SIMPLE CONCEPT THAT THE
DENSER ROCKS, THE ROCKS
WITH A HIGHER PERCENTAGE
OF IRON AND NICKEL AND
OTHER RELATED ELEMENTS
MOVED TO THE DEEP
PARTS OF THE EARTH
AND THE LIGHTER ROCKS
WITH QUARTZ AND FELDSPAR
MOVED TO THE UPPER
PARTS OF THE EARTH.
AND THE RESULT IS A
RATHER SIMPLE, ELEGANT,
THREE-LAYERED EARTH.
OUR PLANET IS MADE UP
OF THREE MAIN LAYERS:
THE CRUST, THE MANTLE,
AND THE CORE.
THIS BALL THAT WE CALL THE
EARTH, YOU COULD THINK
OF IT AS BEING A MORE
SPHERICAL HARDBOILED EGG
WHERE IT HAS A YOLK IN THE
INTERIOR THAT IS WHAT WE
CALL THE CORE AND THAT
CORE IS ACTUALLY MADE UP
OF TWO DIFFERENT PARTS.
PART OF IT IS SOLID AND
PART OF IT IS LIQUID.
AND THE CORE OF THE EARTH
IS ALMOST EXCLUSIVELY
COMPOSED OF IRON.
THE OUTER CORE OF
THE EARTH IS LIQUID
AND THE INNER CORE OF
THE EARTH IS BASICALLY
LIKE A LARGE IRON
SPHERE OR BALL
FLOATING IN THIS
LIQUID OUTER CORE.
THE MANTLE CAN BE COMPARED
TO THE WHITE PART
OF THE HARDBOILED EGG.
IT CONTAINS 67% OF THE
OVERALL MASS OF THE EARTH.
AND THERE'S THE MANTLE
WHICH IS SORT OF LIKE
PLIABLE, MOVABLE ROCK,
AND THEN THERE'S THE CRUST
WHICH IS THE LIGHTEST STUFF
THAT SORT OF STAYS ON THE
EDGE OF THE EARTH, KIND OF
LIKE THE SHELL ON AN EGG.
THE CRUST OF THE EARTH
REALLY IS JUST LIKE THE
EGGSHELL GETTING BROKEN
UP, BUT ABLE TO THEN
SLIDE AROUND ON THAT
HARDBOILED WHITE OF AN EGG.
THE CRUST IS BROKEN UP
INTO MOVING TECTONIC PLATES.
THESE PLATES RECYCLE THE
CRUST FROM MATERIALS DEEP
INSIDE THE EARTH, AND AS
THEY MOVE ABOUT THE SURFACE
THEY ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR NOT
ONLY THE BEAUTIFUL MOUNTAINS
BUT THE DEADLY EARTHQUAKES
AND VIOLENT ERUPTIONS.
HAVE WE TAKEN A FANCY,
FUTURISTIC DRILL SHIP
DOWN TO THE GUTS
OF THE EARTH
TO SEE WHERE THESE LAYERS
ARE AND WHAT'S DOWN THERE?
NO. WE'VE ACTUALLY NEVER
SEEN, OR EVEN SAMPLED
FOR THAT MATTER, THE DEEP
INTERIOR OF THE EARTH.
SO THE QUESTION IS HOW DO WE
KNOW THE EARTH IS LAYERED?
EARTHQUAKES ARE HANDY
IN THAT THEY PRODUCE
SHOCKWAVES THAT PENETRATE
THROUGH THE ENTIRE EARTH
AND THOSE SHOCKWAVES CAN
BE USED LIKE AN X-RAY
IN AN X-RAY MACHINE TO
IMAGE THE VARIOUS LAYERS
WE SEE WITHIN THE EARTH.
SEISMIC STATIONS THAT
ARE BASICALLY SPREAD
OVER THE GLOBE RECEIVE
THESE EARTHQUAKE WAVES.
WHEN AN EARTHQUAKE HAPPENS,
YOU KNOW, SEISMIC WAVES
PROPAGATE IN ALL THESE
DIFFERENT DIRECTIONS
AND THEY PROPAGATE
THROUGH THE EARTH AS WELL
AND THEY BOUNCE OFF
DIFFERENT LAYERS
- THE HARD LAYERS, THE
SOFT LAYERS OF THE EARTH -
AND WE CAN TELL BASED
ON ARRIVAL TIMES
THEIR SPEEDS, YOU KNOW, WHAT
THEY WENT THROUGH BASICALLY.
IF THE EARTH WAS A
HOMOGENEOUS BALL
MADE OF THE SAME
STUFF, THOSE WAVES
WOULDN'T CHANGE OR BEND
OR DO ANYTHING FUNNY
AS THEY PASSED
THROUGH THE EARTH.
BUT WHAT WE FIND IS THAT
THOSE EARTHQUAKE WAVES
BEHAVE IN A VARIETY
OF DIFFERENT WAYS.
AS WE LOOK AT OUR
EARTH FROM SPACE,
WE SEE MORE THAN THE
ROCKS AND THE LAND.
WE SEE THE BLUE
WATER AND CLOUDS AND,
AS WE GET CLOSER, WE SEE
PLANTS AND EVEN ANIMALS.
SO OUR PLANET IS MORE THAN
THE ROCKS AND MINERALS
THAT MAKE UP THE EARTH.
MODERN EARTH SCIENCE
LOOKS AT THE EARTH AS
AN ENTIRE SYSTEM - A GROUP
OF INTERACTIVE PARTS
THAT FORM THE
COMPLEX WHOLE.
THIS SYSTEM INCLUDES THE
SOLID EARTH AS WELL AS
THE HYDROSPHERE -
THAT IS ALL THE WATER,
THE BIOSPHERE - WHICH
IS ALL OF THE LIFE,
AND THE ATMOSPHERE -
THE PROTECTIVE
GASEOUS OUTER LAYER.
OUR EARTH HAS CHANGED
AND CONTINUES TO CHANGE
AND EARTH SCIENTISTS
ARE SEARCHING FOR CLUES
TO UNRAVEL THE COMPLEX
EVENTS THAT HAVE OCCURRED
OVER THE VAST HISTORY
OF OUR PLANET.
WHEN AN EARTH SCIENTIST
IS TRYING TO UNDERSTAND
WHY DID THE DINOSAURS
BECOME EXTINCT,
WELL, THAT HAPPENED
65 MILLION YEARS AGO
AND NO HUMAN BEINGS WERE
AROUND THEN TO LOOK AT
WHAT THE EARTH'S SURFACE
LOOKED LIKE AT THAT TIME,
TO LOOK AT THE
ATMOSPHERE,
EARTH'S VEGETATION,
TO TRY TO LOOK AT
WHAT WAS GOING ON THEN
TO GAIN A SENSE OR TO
APPRECIATE WHY, YOU KNOW,
ENTIRE MAJOR
GROUPS OF ORGANISMS
LIVING AT THAT TIME
WOULD HAVE GONE EXTINCT.
SO OUR CHALLENGE IS TO
DEVELOP WAYS OR TECHNIQUES
- SOME OF WHICH ARE
VERY CLEVER - TO TRY TO
TEASE THAT STORY OUT OF
THE RECORD THAT'S LEFT.
AND THAT'S THE CHALLENGE
OF BEING AN EARTH SCIENTIST.
IT'S ALMOST LIKE
BEING A DETECTIVE
AT THE SCENE
OF A CRIME.
THROUGHOUT TIME GEOLOGISTS
HAVE USED OBSERVATIONS
TO INTERPRET THE
EARTH'S HISTORY.
IN THE 1600'S AND
1700'S, PEOPLE THOUGHT
THE AGE OF THE EARTH
WAS RELATIVELY YOUNG.
BACK THEN THE THEORY
THAT WAS ACCEPTED FOR
THE FORMATION
OF THE EARTH,
FOR THE FORMATION OF LAYERS
OF ROCK AND FOSSILS
WAS THIS THEORY CALLED
"CATASTROPHISM".
BASICALLY THAT THINGS
HAPPENED VERY QUICKLY
ALL AT ONCE.
THE GREAT FLOOD,
FOR INSTANCE,
THAT'S TALKED
ABOUT IN THE BIBLE,
THAT WAS THOUGHT AS A WAY
THAT COULD HAVE TRANSFERRED
ALL THIS MATERIAL, THAT
HAPPENED VERY QUICKLY
AND FOSSILS WERE DEPOSITED
AND THAT'S HOW THAT FORMED.
SO THE AGE OF THE EARTH WAS
THOUGHT TO BE VERY YOUNG
- THOUSANDS OF YEARS.
ONE OF THE VERY EARLY
MILESTONES IN THE STUDY OF
GEOLOGY CAME ABOUT IN THE
1700'S THROUGH A SCOTTISH
GEOLOGIST NAMED JAMES
HUTTON WHO DEVELOPED
A THEORY OR PROPOSED
A THEORY CALLED
"UNIFORMITARIANISM" WHICH
BASICALLY STATES THAT
"THE PRESENT IS THE
KEY TO THE PAST".
AND THIS WAS A COMPLETELY
REVOLUTIONARY IDEA
THAT IS STILL VERY,
VERY POWERFUL TODAY.
THAT WE CAN GO OUT TO A
RIVER LIKE THE RIO GRANDE
AND WE CAN SEE THAT RIVER
CARRYING SAND AND SILT AND
CLAY PARTICLES DOWNSTREAM
AND WHEN THE WATER'S
FLOWING QUICKLY IT'S
CARRYING MORE MATERIAL,
WHEN IT SLOWS DOWN IT
DROPS THAT SEDIMENT OUT
AND WE CAN SEE HOW THIS
SEDIMENT ACCUMULATES OVER
TIME AND IT MAKES IT MUCH
EASIER TO GO BACK IN TIME
AND TO LOOK, FOR EXAMPLE,
AT AN ANCIENT SANDSTONE
AND SAY "I KNOW
HOW THIS FORMED.
I KNOW HOW LONG IT WOULD
HAVE TAKEN THAT SEDIMENT
TO ACCUMULATE
BECAUSE I CAN MAKE
DIRECT OBSERVATIONS TODAY
ON SIMILAR PROCESSES.
COMPLETELY CHANGED THE
WAY WE THOUGHT ABOUT
HOW OLD THE EARTH WAS,
HOW ROCKS FORMED,
AND IT MADE
PEOPLE THINK ON A
DIFFERENT TIME
SCALE, BASICALLY.
AND, YOU KNOW, GEOLOGY'S
ALL ABOUT TIME SCALE.
SO, THINGS DON'T HAPPEN
IN THOUSANDS OF YEARS,
WE'RE THINKING OF MILLIONS
OF YEARS, BILLIONS OF YEARS.
SO THAT'S THE TIME
FRAME WE'RE LOOKING AT
AND WE'RE LOOKING AT
PROCESSES THAT HAPPENED
VERY SLOWLY, YOU
KNOW, PLATE MOVEMENTS
THAT HAPPENED A
CENTIMETER A YEAR.
DEPOSITION OF SEDIMENTS
THAT HAPPENED MILLIMETERS
PER YEAR, SO THAT'S AN
ENTIRELY DIFFERENT WAY
OF LOOKING THAN
WAY BACK WHEN
WHEN PEOPLE WERE CONSIDERING
HOW THE EARTH FORMED.
THIS DISCOVERY LED
GEOLOGISTS TO TRY
AND LEARN MORE ABOUT
THE AGE OF THE EARTH
AS WELL AS ITS HISTORY
BY DATING ROCKS.
THERE ARE TWO WAYS
WE CAN DATE ROCKS.
ONE IS RELATIVE DATING AND
ONE IS ABSOLUTE DATING.
AND RELATIVE DATING IS WE
DON'T HAVE THE EXACT AGE
OF THE ROCK BUT WE CAN MAKE
OBSERVATIONS OF SOME ROCKS
AND SEE THAT THE
LAYERS ON THE BOTTOM
ARE GOING TO BE OLDER THAN
THE LAYERS ON THE TOP.
WE CAN LOOK AT THE SEQUENCE
OF EVENTS THAT HAVE OCCURRED
AND WORK OUT
WHICH ONE'S OLDEST
AND WHICH
ONE'S YOUNGEST.
RELATIVE AGE DATING
MEANS THAT BY LOOKING
AT THESE LAYERS OF
ROCKS KNOWN AS "STRATA"
WE CAN DETERMINE IF
SOMETHING IS YOUNGER THAN
OR OLDER THAN
SOMETHING ELSE.
RELATIVE AGE DATING IS BASED
ON A FEW BASIC PRINCIPLES.
ONE OF THE MOST
FUNDAMENTAL IS:
BUT SOMETIMES GEOLOGIC
PROCESSES CAN INTERRUPT
THESE HORIZONTAL LAYERS.
LAYERS CAN BE
BENT AND TWISTED
OR EVEN TURNED
UPSIDE-DOWN.
AND SOMETIMES CRACKS OR
FAULTS IN AN EXISTING ROCK
ARE FILLED WITH
MAGMA THAT COOLS
AND RESULTS IN
AN IGNEOUS ROCK.
THIS IS KNOWN AS
THE PRINCIPLE OF
CROSS-CUTTING
RELATIONSHIPS
WHICH STATES THAT THE
IGNEOUS INTRUSION IS
ALWAYS YOUNGER THAN THE
ROCK IT CUTS ACROSS.
THESE AS WELL AS OTHER
PRINCIPLES HELPED GEOLOGISTS
DISCOVER RELATIVE
TIME RELATIONSHIPS
AND CREATE A LOGICAL
ORDER OF EVENTS ON EARTH.
ANOTHER WAY TO TELL THE
TIME RELATIONSHIP IN
AN OUTCROP OR A GROUP
OF ROCKS IS TO LOOK AT
THE FOSSILS THAT HAVE
BEEN DEPOSITED IN THEM.
WE HAVE A GOOD IDEA OF WHEN
A CERTAIN SPECIES EXISTED
OR DURING WHAT
TIME PERIOD.
AND BY CORRELATING
THAT TO THE ROCK,
THE ROCK SEDIMENTS
AND WHAT'S AROUND IT,
BELOW IT, BESIDE IT,
YOU CAN GET A GOOD SENSE
OF WHAT HAPPENED WHEN,
WHEN IT WAS DEPOSITED,
WHEN DID THIS
INTRUSION COME IN,
LAVA FLOW HAPPEN,
UM, BASED ON THE
OTHER ROCKS AROUND IT.
BY LOOKING AT
THINGS LIKE THE WAY
A ROAD'S CUT THROUGH THE
ROCK, YOU'RE ACTUALLY
LOOKING AT PART OF
THE STORY OF TIME.
YOU'RE LOOKING AT INDIVIDUAL
PAGES OF WHAT PROCESSES
WERE GOING ON BECAUSE
EACH OF THOSE LAYERS
IS TELLING YOU
A DIFFERENT STORY.
IT TELLS YOU WHETHER YOU
HAD A STREAM THAT HAD
MOVED THROUGH HERE AND
THEN LATER THAT STREAM WAS
BURIED BY A SWAMP WHEN
WATER LEVELS HAD COME UP.
AND THEN MAYBE LATER ANOTHER
STREAM CUT THROUGH IT.
AND JUST BY LOOKING
AT THE TYPES OF ROCKS
AND THE TYPES OF
FOSSILS IN THE ROCKS
TELLS YOU THAT
INDIVIDUAL STORY.
WHILE ROCKS AND FOSSILS HELP
TELL THE EARTH'S HISTORY,
GEOLOGISTS HAVE FOUND OTHER
WAYS TO GET INFORMATION.
WE CAN LOOK IN ICE CORES.
THESE ARE UP IN THE
GLACIAL REGIONS,
IN THE POLAR REGIONS.
ICE CORES THAT CAN BE
MILES THICK AND THERE'S
BANDING THAT EXISTS
IN THESE ICE CORES
- THE SUMMER, WINTER BANDS -
OR WE CAN ACTUALLY
COUNT BACKWARDS
AND DETERMINE THAT
THIS IS THE YEAR - 1352,
AND IN THAT YEAR,
BECAUSE IN ICE RECORD
WE SEE AN ASH LAYER,
THERE WAS A LARGE VOLCANO
THAT TOOK PLACE AT THAT TIME.
SO WE CAN MAKE RELATIVE
COMPARISONS OF AGES THAT WAY.
IN ADDITION TO
ESTABLISHING RELATIVE AGES,
WE NOW HAVE A WAY TO GIVE
RELIABLE NUMERICAL DATES
TO THE EARTH'S
EVENTS AND MATERIALS
THROUGH ABSOLUTE
AGE DATING.
ABSOLUTE AGE DATING IS
BASED ON THE NATURAL
RADIOACTIVE DECAY
OF CERTAIN ELEMENTS
WHICH OCCURS AT A CONSTANT
RATE THROUGHOUT TIME.
SO BY MEASURING HOW MUCH
WE HAVE TODAY AND HOW MUCH
OF THE DECAYED PRODUCT
IS THERE TODAY,
WE CAN VERY ACCURATELY
DETERMINE THE AGE AT WHICH
A MINERAL OR A ROCK
FRAGMENT OR A POTTERY SHARD
OR AN OLD TREE THAT'S
BURIED IN A SEDIMENT,
WHAT THE AGE OF
THAT MATERIAL IS.
SO IT'S BEEN VERY
BENEFICIAL FOR UNRAVELING
THE TIME SCALE OF
EARTH'S HISTORY.
IN 1980, FATHER
AND SON SCIENTISTS
WALTER AND LUIS ALVAREZ
FOUND STRONG EVIDENCE
THAT A GIANT ASTEROID
HIT THE EARTH
AROUND 65 MILLION
YEARS AGO,
DRASTICALLY CHANGING
THE ENVIRONMENT
AND POSSIBLY KILLING
OFF THE DINOSAURS.
UP UNTIL THAT
POINT THAT WAS
ALWAYS ONE OF
THE BIG MYSTERIES
IS HOW DID THE DINOSAURS
ACTUALLY GO EXTINCT?
AND SO THIS RECOGNITION
THAT CATASTROPHISM
ACTUALLY DOES OCCUR...
FIRST EVERYTHING
WAS CATASTROPHIC
- NOAH'S FLOOD - THEN IT
BECAME UNIFORMITARIANISM
WHERE EVERYTHING WAS
THE SAME THROUGH HISTORY
AND NOW WE'VE RECOGNIZED
THAT IT'S MORE COMPLICATED.
IT'S NEITHER ONE
OR THE OTHER.
WE HAVE PERIODS WHERE
THINGS DON'T CHANGE
AND THEN PERHAPS RARE BUT
REALLY CATASTROPHIC EVENTS
HAVE OCCURRED
IN THE PAST.
AND SO IT'S LIKE
READING A HISTORY BOOK
BUT EACH PAGE IS A VERY
LONG PERIOD OF TIME.
AND WE USE THE FOSSILS AND
THE DIFFERENT ROCK TYPES
AND SO ON TO TRY AND
RECONSTRUCT EVENTS
GOING BACK TO THE EARLY
HISTORY OF OUR PLANET.
THE THING THAT REALLY
SEPARATES GEOLOGY
FROM ALL OTHER SCIENCE
IS THE FACT THAT
GEOLOGY DEALS WITH
VAST SUMS OF TIME.
TIME THAT MOST HUMANS CANNOT
EVEN BEGIN TO RELATE TO.
GEOLOGICAL TIME IS OFTEN
REFERRED TO AS "DEEP TIME".
IT'S VERY DIFFICULT
TO CONCEIVE OF.
WE TALK ABOUT SUCH
INCREDIBLY LONG EXPANSES
OF TIME.
WE THINK OUR PLANET
WAS FORMED ABOUT
4.6 BILLION YEARS AGO.
BUT WHAT DOES THAT
NUMBER REALLY MEAN?
HOW VAST IS 4.6
BILLION YEARS?
IT'S MIND-BOGGLING.
IT IS ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE
FOR US TO COMPREHEND
THIS GEOLOGIC DEEP TIME.
BUT BY CONDENSING 4.6
BILLION YEARS INTO A
ONE-YEAR CALENDAR, WE
CAN BEGIN TO APPRECIATE
THE VAST HISTORY
OF THE EARTH.
IN THIS ONE-YEAR
COMPARISON,
EACH SECOND WILL
EQUAL ABOUT 146 YEARS;
AND EACH DAY, 12.6
MILLION YEARS.
AND WE BEGIN WHEN THE EARTH
FORMED OUT OF A NEBULA
ON JANUARY 1ST.
THE OLDEST FOUND ROCKS DATE
BACK 3.8 BILLION YEARS
- MARCH 4TH ON
OUR CALENDAR.
THE FIRST BACTERIA APPEARED
THREE AND A QUARTER
BILLION YEARS AGO, BUT MORE
THAN A BILLION YEARS PASS
BEFORE THE FIRST
CELLS WITH A NUCLEUS
APPEAR ON JULY 17TH.
IT IS NOT UNTIL SEPTEMBER
30TH THAT THE FIRST
MULTI-CELLED ORGANISMS
SUCH AS SEAWEED
AND ALGAE APPEARED -
1.5 BILLION YEARS AGO.
ON NOVEMBER 21ST, ONLY
500 MILLION YEARS AGO,
THE FIRST FISH APPEARED.
AND LATER, ON NOVEMBER 24TH,
THERE IS FOSSIL EVIDENCE
THAT THE FIRST
LAND PLANTS APPEARED.
ON DECEMBER 1ST THE FIRST
INSECTS ARRIVED, FOLLOWED
BY SHARKS ON DECEMBER 2ND,
370 MILLION YEARS AGO.
DECEMBER 12TH BEGINS
THE AGE OF THE REPTILES,
INCLUDING THE DINOSAURS,
WHO FIRST APPEARED
228 MILLION YEARS AGO
AND REIGNED THE EARTH
FOR NEARLY TWO WEEKS UNTIL
THE 26TH OF DECEMBER
WHEN A GIANT METEOR
SLAMMED INTO THE EARTH
CAUSING MASS EXTINCTION.
ON DECEMBER 28TH,
TWO DAYS LATER,
THE FIRST MONKEYS APPEARED.
AND, ON NEW YEAR'S EVE,
DECEMBER 31ST AT 11:48 PM,
HOMO SAPIENS ARRIVED.
AND OVER THE
NEXT 12 MINUTES,
ALL OF HUMAN HISTORY
WOULD UNFOLD
INCLUDING THE RISE
AND FALLS OF EMPIRES,
AND MANS' LANDING
ON THE MOON
WHICH WOULD TAKE PLACE
A QUARTER OF A SECOND
BEFORE THE STROKE
OF MIDNIGHT.
GEOLOGY IS A
RELATIVELY NEW SCIENCE.
WE ARE JUST SCRATCHING
THE SURFACE OF WHAT WE
CAN KNOW ABOUT THE HISTORY
OF THIS AWESOME PLANET.
MOST PEOPLE THINK OF
GEOLOGY AS SIMPLY
THE STUDY OF ROCKS.
BUT FOR ME GEOLOGY IS
MUCH, MUCH MORE THAN JUST
LOOKING AT ROCKS.
IT'S ABOUT ALL OF THE
DIFFERENT EARTH PROCESSES
THAT SHAPE THE SURFACE OF
THE EARTH WHERE WE LIVE,
THAT CONTROL THINGS LIKE
VOLCANISM AND EARTHQUAKES
AND WHERE ALL OF OUR
NATURAL RESOURCES COME FROM.
ONE OF THE THINGS I
REALLY LIKE ABOUT GEOLOGY,
YOU GET A CHANCE TO
REALLY FIND OUT ABOUT
THE PHYSICAL EARTH YOU
LIVE ON, YOU KNOW,
WHICH YOU NEVER REALLY
THINK ABOUT FROM DAY TO DAY.
WE KNOW ABOUT THE CARS WE
DRIVE, ABOUT THE HOUSES
WE HAVE, ABOUT THE
COMPUTERS WE OWN,
BUT WE DON'T KNOW
ABOUT THE VERY THING
THAT WE'RE WALKING
ON EVERY DAY.
GEOLOGY IS A FASCINATING AND
EXTREMELY EXCITING SCIENCE
BECAUSE YOU'RE LOOKING AT
SO MANY DIFFERENT ASPECTS
OF THE EARTH.
AND IT TIES IN BIOLOGY
AND ASTRONOMY AND PHYSICS
AND ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE AND
OCEANOGRAPHY AND SO MANY
THINGS THAT THERE'S NO
SINGULAR ASPECT OF GEOLOGY
AND ALMOST EVERYTHING YOU
LOOK AT TELLS AN AMAZING
AND FANTASTIC STORY
ABOUT THE EARTH.
GEOLOGISTS HAVE BEEN
ABLE TO UNRAVEL
MANY OF THE MYSTERIES
OF THE EARTH'S HISTORY,
BUT WE STILL HAVE
A LONG WAY TO GO
IN UNDERSTANDING OUR
PLANET'S DIVERSE TERRAIN
AND THE PROCESSES THAT
SHAPE OUR DYNAMIC WORLD.
*